---
title: grub-0.97 and gcc-4.9
date: Dec 16, 2015
---

:PostID: 188
:Title: grub-0.97 and gcc-4.9
:Keywords: c, i386, setjmp, longjmp, trampoline, ltrace
:Categories: notes

Once upon a time (actually the day before yesterday) i dropped an eye
at **freenode/#gentoo-dev** IRC channel and noticed an unusual question:

::

  21:18 <@_AxS_> gcc internals issue..  does anyone happen to know if gcc-4.9 -O2 treats trampolines
                 differently than gcc-4.8 and previous? (as well as gcc-4.9 -O0) ?

I did not know much about trampolines besides they are gcc extension allowing you to write nested functions
that can refer to variables outside the scope: `a doc <https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Nested-Functions.html>`_.

.. raw:: html

   <!--more-->

the problem
===========

_AxS_ described an issue: **grub-0.97** happens to SIGSEGV
when you run a 'grub' helper tool and try to exit from it's shell.
He also had a workaround to make grub work: build it with **-O0**
(optimisations disabled).

_AxS_'s mystretous valgrind backtrace on a grub userspace binary looked like that:

::

  ==13972== Process terminating with default action of signal 11 (SIGSEGV)
  ==13972==  Bad permissions for mapped region at address 0x1C
  ==13972==    at 0x1C: ???
  ==13972==    by 0x40D2782: (below main) (in /lib32/libc-2.21.so)

It looks like a very simple error jumping by NULL address + tiny offset.
"Must be very easy to fix" was my thought and i've started digging :)

reproducing
===========

The first thing is to try to reproduce crash locally with debugging symbols enabled:

::

  grub-0.97/grub $ echo quit | ./grub
  Probing devices to guess BIOS drives. This may take a long time.
  Segmentation fault

Yay! I'm in the game! Next step is to try to get a symbolized version of valgrind output.

valgrind
========

I was not so lucky as my libc uses too fresh instructions valgrind
does not know about yet:

::

  Probing devices to guess BIOS drives. This may take a long time.
  vex x86->IR: unhandled instruction bytes: 0xC5 0xF8 0x77 0xE8
  ==19149== valgrind: Unrecognised instruction at address 0x412268f.
  ==19149==    at 0x412268F: vfprintf (vfprintf.c:1630)
  ==19149==    by 0x41D5DAF: __vsprintf_chk (vsprintf_chk.c:85)
  ==19149==    by 0x41D5CFF: __sprintf_chk (sprintf_chk.c:31)
  ==19149==    by 0x8060068: sprintf (stdio2.h:33)
  ==19149==    by 0x8060068: get_floppy_disk_name (device.c:431)
  ==19149==    by 0x8060068: init_device_map (device.c:825)
  ==19149==    by 0x8049C2A: grub_stage2 (asmstub.c:237)
  ==19149==    by 0x8049860: main (main.c:268)

**C5 F8 77** is an **AVX2** **vzeroupper** `valgrind needs an update <https://bugs.kde.org/show_bug.cgi?id=340849>`_.

::

  [vzeroupper] Set the upper half of all YMM registers to zero.
               Used when switching between 128-bit use and 256-bit use.

That means i have to use other tools to see what happens at crash time.

ltrace
======

To get an insight into what happened i've looked at function call trace.
**ltrace** intercepts dynamic symbols (like libc symbols) program tries
to call and outputs function names and parameters.

You can add custom description of data structures into **/etc/ltrace.conf**
(or **~/.ltrace**) to make things look even better. I have the following
snippet to track **GMP** arithmetic i used to debug
`unrelated bug <https://ghc.haskell.org/trac/ghc/ticket/10518>`_ in **ghc**:

::

  ; direct translation from gmp.h
  typedef mp_limb_t   = hex(ulong);
  typedef mp_bitcnt_t = ulong;
  typedef mp_size_t   = long;
  ;
  typedef __mpz_struct = struct(int, int, array(mp_limb_t, elt1)*);
  ;
  typedef mpz_ptr    = __mpz_struct*;
  typedef mpz_srcptr = __mpz_struct*;
  ;
  void __gmpz_mul_2exp(+mpz_ptr, mpz_srcptr, mp_bitcnt_t);
  void __gmpz_ior(+mpz_ptr, mpz_srcptr, mpz_srcptr);
  void __gmpz_add_ui(+mpz_ptr, mpz_srcptr, ulong);
  void* __gmpz_realloc(mpz_srcptr, mp_size_t);
  ;
  typedef mp_ptr    = void*;
  ;
  mp_limb_t __gmpn_lshift(mp_ptr, array(mp_limb_t, arg3)*, mp_size_t, uint);
  void __gmpn_copyi(mp_ptr, array(mp_limb_t, arg3)*, mp_size_t);

But back to grub:

::

  $ echo quit | ltrace -olog ./grub
  ...
  __ctype_b_loc()                                                               = 0xf75656cc
  waddch(0x988f3b8, '\r')                                                       = 0
  wmove(0x988f3b8, 8, 0)                                                        = 0
  endwin(0xf6bdb200, 128, 0xf6bcaf67, 0x805b3f7)                                = 0
  __longjmp_chk(0x8071f60, 1, 0x8071b3c, 0x8049f26 <no return ...>
  --- SIGSEGV (Segmentation fault) ---
  +++ killed by SIGSEGV +++

**longjmp()** needs a **setjmp()** call to store stack context to return to.
A few of **setjmp()** calls were in the log trace somewhere in the beginning of a trace:

::

  scrollok(0x988f3b8, 1, 0, 0x8049d82)                                          = 0
  keypad(0x988f3b8, 1, 0, 0x8049d82)                                            = 0
  wtimeout(0x988f3b8, 100, 0, 0x8049d82)                                        = 0x988f3b8
  signal(SIGWINCH, 0x1)                                                         = 0xf7737920
  sync()                                                                        = 0
  _setjmp(0x8071f60, 0, 0, 0)                                                   = 0
  _setjmp(0x807d340, 0, 0, 0)                                                   = 0
  _setjmp(0x807d440, 0xf6bcafb0, 0, 0x805d97d)                                  = 0

**setjmp()** accepts a single parameter): a pointer to buffer where to store current context.

locating crash site
===================

Resolving **0x8071f60** to a symbol to get an idea where it gets called from (**gdb** breakpoint
would also do the trick):

::

  $ gdb ./grub
  ...
  (gdb) disassemble 0x8071f60
  Dump of assembler code for function env_for_exit:
     0x08071f60 <+0>:     add    %al,(%eax)
     0x08071f62 <+2>:     add    %al,(%eax)
     0x08071f64 <+4>:     add    %al,(%eax)

Looking up code that sets and restores **env_for_exit**:

.. code-block::c

  /*
   * $ git grep -C40 env_for_exit
   * grub/asmstub.c:
   */
  ...
  /* The jump buffer for exiting correctly.  */
  static jmp_buf env_for_exit;
  
  /* The main entry point into this mess. */
  int
  grub_stage2 (void)
  {
    /* These need to be static, because they survive our stack transitions. */
    static int status = 0;
    static void *realstack;
    void *simstack_alloc_base, *simstack;
    size_t simstack_size, page_size;
    int i;
  
    auto void doit (void);
  
    /* We need a nested function so that we get a clean stack frame,
       regardless of how the code is optimized. */
    void doit (void)
      {
        /* Make sure our stack lives in the simulated memory area. */
        asm volatile ("movl %%esp, %0\n\tmovl %1, %%esp\n"
               : "=&r" (realstack) : "r" (simstack));
  
        /* Do a setjmp here for the stop command.  */
        if (! setjmp (env_for_exit))
          {
            /* Actually enter the generic stage2 code.  */
            status = 0;
            init_bios_info (); /* somewhere here quit()->stop() is called; */
          }
        else
          {
            /* If ERRNUM is non-zero, then set STATUS to non-zero.  */
            if (errnum)
              status = 1;
          }

        /* Replace our stack before we use any local variables. */
        asm volatile ("movl %0, %%esp\n" : : "r" (realstack));
      }
    assert (grub_scratch_mem == 0);
  ...
    doit ();
  ...
  }
  ...
  void
  stop (void)
  {
  #ifdef HAVE_LIBCURSES
    if (use_curses)
      endwin ();
  #endif
  
    /* Jump to doit.  */
    longjmp (env_for_exit, 1);
  }
  ...
  /* stage2/builtins.c: */
  /* quit */
  static int
  quit_func (char *arg, int flags)
  {
    stop ();
    /* Never reach here.  */
    return 0;
  }
  static struct builtin builtin_quit =
  {
    "quit",
    quit_func,
    BUILTIN_CMDLINE | BUILTIN_HELP_LIST,
    "quit",
    "Exit from the GRUB shell."
  };

A low of stuff happens here.

gcc passes
==========

As we know from _AxS_ **-O0** makes **grub** magically work.

Checking again by rebuilding as **-O1** and **-O0** this single file **grub/asmstub.c**.
(The rest is built with **-O1** to keep amount of changes at minimum).

- works with **-O0**
- but **SIGSEGV**s with **-O1**

**gcc**'s **-O<N>** levels are sets of indivitual (hopefully mostly orthogonal)
optimisations. We can break **-O1** down and find which of passes broke things.

The following command dumps all individual passes:

::

  $ gcc -Q --help=optimizers
  $ gcc -Q --help=optimizers | wc -l
  221

Now it's time to find out the exact optimization pass(es) that renders code unusable.

::

  $ gcc -m32 -Q -O0 --help=optimizers > O0
  $ gcc -m32 -Q -O1 --help=optimizers > O1
  $ diff -U0 O0 O1 | grep enabled
  +  -fbranch-count-reg                   [enabled]
  +  -fcombine-stack-adjustments          [enabled]
  +  -fcompare-elim                       [enabled]
  +  -fcprop-registers                    [enabled]
  +  -fdefer-pop                          [enabled]
  +  -fforward-propagate                  [enabled]
  +  -fguess-branch-probability           [enabled]
  +  -fif-conversion                      [enabled]
  +  -fif-conversion2                     [enabled]
  +  -finline-functions-called-once       [enabled]
  +  -fipa-profile                        [enabled]
  +  -fipa-pure-const                     [enabled]
  +  -fipa-reference                      [enabled]
  +  -fmove-loop-invariants               [enabled]
  +  -fshrink-wrap                        [enabled]
  +  -fsplit-wide-types                   [enabled]
  +  -fssa-phiopt                         [enabled]
  +  -ftree-bit-ccp                       [enabled]
  +  -ftree-ccp                           [enabled]
  +  -ftree-ch                            [enabled]
  +  -ftree-copy-prop                     [enabled]
  +  -ftree-copyrename                    [enabled]
  +  -ftree-dce                           [enabled]
  +  -ftree-dominator-opts                [enabled]
  +  -ftree-dse                           [enabled]
  +  -ftree-fre                           [enabled]
  +  -ftree-pta                           [enabled]
  +  -ftree-sink                          [enabled]
  +  -ftree-slsr                          [enabled]
  +  -ftree-sra                           [enabled]
  +  -ftree-ter                           [enabled]

Picking a bunch of flags at a time i've distilled it down to
a single flag:

- **-O1** - **SIGSEGV**s
- **-O1 -fno-combine-stack-adjustments** - works!

assembly changes
================

Now let's check code genertion difference:

::

  $ x86_64-pc-linux-gnu-gcc -m32 -DHAVE_CONFIG_H <...> -O1                                -S -o asmstub-O1.S asmstub.c
  $ x86_64-pc-linux-gnu-gcc -m32 -DHAVE_CONFIG_H <...> -O1 -fno-combine-stack-adjustments -S -o asmstub-O1-fno.S asmstub.c
  $ diff -U10 asmstub-O1.S asmstub-O1-fno.S
  --- asmstub-O1.S        2015-12-16 22:28:30.656791615 +0000
  +++ asmstub-O1-fno.S    2015-12-16 22:29:49.629693066 +0000
  @@ -56,31 +56,33 @@
          movl    %edx, %eax
   .L8:
          rep ret
          .cfi_endproc
   .LFE113:
          .size   console_translate_key, .-console_translate_key
          .type   doit.7394, @function
   doit.7394:
   .LFB86:
          .cfi_startproc
  -       subl    $24, %esp
  -       .cfi_def_cfa_offset 28
  +       subl    $12, %esp
  +       .cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
          movl    (%ecx), %edx
   #APP
   # 176 "asmstub.c" 1
          movl %esp, %eax
          movl %edx, %esp
   
   # 0 "" 2
   #NO_APP
          movl    %eax, realstack.7387
  +       subl    $12, %esp
  +       .cfi_def_cfa_offset 28
          pushl   $env_for_exit
          .cfi_def_cfa_offset 32
          call    _setjmp
          addl    $16, %esp
          .cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
          testl   %eax, %eax
          jne     .L21
          movl    $0, status.7386
          call    init_bios_info
          jmp     .L20

See what happens here? You might need to revisit **doit()** code snippet above
in this post. Optimisation combines stack allocation at the very **doit()** start
(before **asm** statement) and stack allocation right before **setjmp()** call.

That **%esp** adjustment optimization happens as if there would be no **#APP** / **#NOAPP** guarded code.
(**#APP** / **#NOAPP** wraps around code emitted by **asm** statements)
But that asm statement overrides **%esp** value!

(Exercise for the reader: what exactly breaks by this transformation?)

gcc inline assembly
===================

Going back to original source snippet:

.. code-block::c

    void doit (void)
      {
        /* Make sure our stack lives in the simulated memory area. */
        asm volatile ("movl %%esp, %0\n\tmovl %1, %%esp\n"
               : "=&r" (realstack) : "r" (simstack));

Some facts about that **asm** statement:

- backups original **%esp** value and sets new value from **realstack**
- list of output arguments (to expand **%0**)
- list of input arguments (to expand **%1**)

gcc does very limited parsing of asm string statement as gcc
usually does not know of all instructions binutils supports
(gcc basically searches for "%<N>" templates and substitutes for allocated operands).

Thus programmer needs to specify explicit effect of written code.
Effect gets derived only from input and output arguments but you can
also specify unobvious effects like condition flags or arbitrary memory
updates: `more details <http://ibiblio.org/gferg/ldp/GCC-Inline-Assembly-HOWTO.html#ss5.3>`_.

the fix
=======

Thus our fix is to update the assembly a bit:

.. code-block::diff

  diff --git a/grub/asmstub.c b/grub/asmstub.c
  index 6354806..44b056f 100644
  --- a/grub/asmstub.c
  +++ b/grub/asmstub.c
  @@ -175,5 +175,5 @@ grub_stage2 (void)
         /* Make sure our stack lives in the simulated memory area. */
         asm volatile ("movl %%esp, %0\n\tmovl %1, %%esp\n"
  -                   : "=&r" (realstack) : "r" (simstack));
  +                   : "=&r" (realstack) : "r" (simstack) : "%esp");
  
         /* Do a setjmp here for the stop command.  */
  @@ -192,5 +192,5 @@ grub_stage2 (void)
  
         /* Replace our stack before we use any local variables. */
  -      asm volatile ("movl %0, %%esp\n" : : "r" (realstack));
  +      asm volatile ("movl %0, %%esp\n" : : "r" (realstack) : "%esp");
       }

fun facts
=========

All these nested functions, **setjmp()**, **longjmp()** were only distractions
hiding very old and simple code bug. Ancient **grub-0.92** from 2002
(available `here <ftp://alpha.gnu.org/gnu/grub/>`_) also had that flaw.

The smarter compilers the funnier life :)
