---
title: "AoC of 2022"
date: December 25, 2022
---

This year I again took part in `AoC`: <https://adventofcode.com/2022>.
I published my solutions at <https://github.com/trofi/AoC/tree/main/2022>.

As usual problems were appearing once a day at 5AM from Dec 1 to Dec 25.
I did not get up that early. Instead my personal goal was to solve them
within 24 hours of publish time and get the source code within 4KB each.
I failed a few of them.

This year I again took `rust` (without `cargo`) to get some practice in
it. I think it went a bit smoother this time.

## rust niceties: lifetime tracking and error handling

I was more conscious of decreasing amount of data copying around.
Instead of slapping `.clone()` all over the place. `rust` is great at
tracking dangling references with lifetimes. For example in
[Day 16: Proboscidea Volcanium](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/16)
I encoded search space as a vector and a set of `&str` "pointers"
instead of copying `String`s in:

```rust
enum Expr<'a> {
  Val(&'a str, isize),
  Expr(&'a str, &'a str, &'a str, &'a str),
  Assert(&'a str, &'a str),
}

fn parse<'a>(i: &'a str) -> Vec<Expr<'a>> {
  ...
```

I even attempted using a bit of error handling in
1-2 problems instead of `panic!()`-ing on unexpected data:

```rust
impl FromStr for Assignment {
  type Err = E;
  fn from_str(s: &str) -> Result<Self, Self::Err> {
    let numbers: Result<Vec<usize>, Self::Err> =
      s.split('-').map(|e|
        e.parse().map_err(|err| mk_e(format!("'{}': {}", e, err)))
      ).collect();
    match numbers?.as_slice() {
      &[a, b] => Ok(Assignment{from: a, to: b}),
      _       => Err(mk_e(format!("'{}' does not match N-M format", s)))
    }
  }
}
```

Here `Iter<Result<...>>` constructs `Result<Vec<...>>` (instead of
typical `Vec<Result<...>>`!). It's a handy way to pop errors out from
iterator based loops. I'm still very clumzy at constructing new errors.
But at least I did not lose them here.

## Funniest problems

The solutions to most problems are technically very boring. But some
problem statements are great: a bit of ray casting, 2d and 3d physics
simulation and even CPU+CRT simulation!

Here is my list of fun problems I remembered:

- [Day 10: Cathode-Ray Tube](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/10)

  Good mix of "hardware" simulations needs in a single problem.

- [Day 14: Regolith Reservoir](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/14)

  A problem where falling sand is simulated.

- [Day 22: Monkey Map](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/22)

  The only problem I did not manage to solve in 24 hours. I don't like
  my solution. But the problem statement is great!

- [Day 25: Full of Hot Air](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/25)

  A nice problem on unusual number base.

I did not include a bunch of other problems like robot
production and valve handling as they looked very similar to me. I
solved them all with [A* search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A*_search_algorithm).

Grepping through the solutions `visited` keyword happens 5 times.
I would say it is too many similar search-in-graph problems in a single
year. But maybe it's just me who used search too frequently without an
attempt at finding better solution?

Have fun!
