---
title: "AoC of 2025"
date: December 17, 2025
---

This time I managed to finish all `AoC` challenges within a week of
problems being published.
My solutions: <https://github.com/trofi/AoC/tree/main/2025>.
First 9 problems I managed to do in a day they were published. But the
[10th](https://adventofcode.com/2025/day/10) one was tough.

As usual I tried to solve the problems within 24 hours of publish
time and get the source code under `4K`. I used `rust` again. I did not
use any external crates.
This time I also attempted to handle errors in a more graceful way to
avoid `.unwrap()` / `.expect("")` calls. I found a few nice patterns
like collecting into `Result<Vec<_>>`:

```rust
$ evcxr

>> #[derive(Debug)] struct E{}

>> [Ok(1),Ok(3),Ok(5)].into_iter().collect::<Result<Vec<_>, E>>()
Ok([1, 3, 5])
```

Or reducing `Result` values:

```
>> [Ok(1),Ok(3),Ok(5)].into_iter().sum::<Result<isize, E>>()
Ok(9)
```

I felt I did a bit too much `.map_err()` conversions to capture more into
error context. I also relied on `Debug` instances instead of `Display`
as I allowed `main()` to return by error type outside `main()`. There
probably are better mechanisms to achieve the same. But otherwise error
propagation is quite pleasant in `rust`.

## Funniest problems

No pencil-and-paper problems this time. All required a program to write.
I did solve a few examples from `Day 10` by hand to explore it a bit
better. A few of the problems had very interesting problem statement:

- [Day 8: Playground](https://adventofcode.com/2025/day/8) is a nice
  concise definition of a large input graph.
- [Day 10: Factory](https://adventofcode.com/2025/day/10) tricked me
  into searching for a brute force solution. After failing that I managed
  to see a nice system of equations and a function to minimize.
  I did not solve the minimization part nicely, but I liked the equation
  solver.

It felt like first few problems had very gnarly corner cases to handle.
I was afraid the problem complexity will really go up. But it was just
about right for me.

Have fun!
